[docs] Add `InitColorSchemeScript` docs and API (#45927)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/material/components/init-color-scheme-script/init-color-scheme-script.md

---
productId: material-ui
title: InitColorSchemeScript component
components: InitColorSchemeScript
githubSource: packages/mui-material/src/InitColorSchemeScript
---

# InitColorSchemeScript

<p class="description">The InitColorSchemeScript component eliminates dark mode flickering in server-side-rendered applications.</p>

## Introduction

The `InitColorSchemeScript` component is used to remove the dark mode flicker that can occur in server-side-rendered (SSR) applications.

> This script that runs before React to attach an attribute based on the user preference so that the correct color mode is applied on first render.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script runs before React to attach an attribute based on the user preference so that the correct color mode is applied on first render.
```

---
productId: material-ui
title: InitColorSchemeScript component
components: InitColorSchemeScript
githubSource: packages/mui-material/src/InitColorSchemeScript
---

# InitColorSchemeScript

> <p class="description">InitColorSchemeScript component removes the dark mode flicker for server-side rendering application.</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p class="description">The InitColorSchemeScript component eliminates dark mode flickering in server-side-rendered applications.</p>
```

## Introduction

> `InitColorSchemeScript` component is used to remove the dark mode flicker for server-side rendering (SSR) applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `InitColorSchemeScript` component is used to remove the dark mode flicker that can occur in server-side-rendered (SSR) applications.
```

> It is a script that runs before React to attach an attribute based on user preference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script that runs before React to attach an attribute based on the user preference so that the correct color mode is applied on first render.
```

> It is recommended to use this component whenever:

Reviewer: passive voice –> "you"-centered action

```suggestion
You should implement this component whenever:
```

Reviewer: IIUC, you should use these when _both_ of these statements are true, right? (You wouldn't need it if only one of these statements were true.) In that case, I'd suggest rewriting it as a single sentence:

```suggestion
For the best user experience, you should implement this component in any server-rendered Material UI app that supports both light and dark modes.
```

Author: > you should use these when both of these statements are true, right

Yes, that's the message I want to convey.

- The application supports light and dark modes.

> - The application is server rendered (SSR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The application is rendered on the server.
```

> 
> - The application supports light and dark modes.
> - The application is server rendered (SSR).

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Basics

> You need to enable CSS variables with `colorSchemeSelector: 'data'` in your theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, enable CSS variables with `colorSchemeSelector: 'data'` in your theme.
```

```js
import { ThemeProvider, createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

const theme = createTheme({
  cssVariables: {
    colorSchemeSelector: 'data',
  },
});

function App() {
  return <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>{/* Your app */}</ThemeProvider>;
}
```

Then, render the `InitColorSchemeScript` component as the first child of the `<body>` tag.

> Below are the location for rendering `InitColorSchemeScript` component for a specific framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sections below detail where to render the `InitColorSchemeScript` component when working with Next.js.
```

### Next.js App Router

> Place the `InitColorSchemeScript` component in the `layout.tsx` file:

Reviewer: nitpick: the Next.js docs style these files with no extension (since the reader might be using JS or TS): `layout`, `_document`, etc.

```suggestion
Place the `InitColorSchemeScript` component in the root `layout` file:
```

```js title="src/app/layout.tsx"
import InitColorSchemeScript from '@mui/material/InitColorSchemeScript';

export default function RootLayout(props: { children: React.ReactNode }) {
  return (
    <html lang="en" suppressHydrationWarning>
      <body>
        <InitColorSchemeScript attribute="class" />
        {props.children}
      </body>
    </html>
  );
}
```

### Next.js Pages Router

> Place the `InitColorSchemeScript` component in the `_document.tsx` file:

Reviewer: nitpick: I think it's helpful to indicate that `_document` is a custom file that you have to create if you don't already have one.

```suggestion
Place the `InitColorSchemeScript` component in a custom `_document` file:
```

```js title="pages/_document.tsx"
import { Html, Head, Main, NextScript } from 'next/document';
import InitColorSchemeScript from '@mui/material/InitColorSchemeScript';

export default function MyDocument(props) {
  return (
    <Html lang="en">
      <Head>{/* tags */}</Head>
      <body>
        <InitColorSchemeScript />
        <Main />
        <NextScript />
      </body>
    </Html>
  );
}
```

## Customization

### Class attribute

> To attach class to DOM element, set the `attribute` prop to `"class"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To attach classes to DOM elements, set the `attribute` prop to `"class"`.
```

```js
<InitColorSchemeScript attribute="class" />
```

> The color scheme node (default to `html`) will be set to the class name based on the user preference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sets the class name on the color scheme node (which defaults to `<html>`) according to the user's system preference.
```

```html
<html class="dark"></html>
```

### Arbitrary attribute

> To attach arbitrary attribute to DOM element, use `%s` as a placeholder in the `attribute` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To attach arbitrary attributes to DOM elements, use `%s` as a placeholder on the `attribute` prop.
```

```js
<InitColorSchemeScript attribute="[data-theme='%s']" /> // <html data-theme="dark">
<InitColorSchemeScript attribute=".mode-%s" /> // <html class="mode-dark">
```

### Default mode

> Set this prop to specify the default mode when the user first visits the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the `defaultMode` prop to specify the default mode when the user first visits the page.
```

> For example, if you want first-visit users to see dark mode, set the `defaultMode` prop to `"dark"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you want users to see the dark mode on their first visit, set the `defaultMode` prop to `"dark"`.
```
